ome leading opponents of same-sex marriage said this week that their legal fight was far from over, with several federal appeals courts still to rule and a continued prospect of arguing the constitutional issues before the Supreme Court.

They disputed the assessments of many legal experts, who have said it appears all but inevitable that the remaining state bans on same-sex marriage will be struck down. Rather, opponents argued that Monday’s Supreme Court action, which had the effect of permitting same-sex marriage in five states and may soon overturn bans in six more, was not necessarily a sign that the court would establish such marriages as a nationwide right.

Instead, they see a good chance that when the Supreme Court directly considers the issues, it will rule in favor of the people’s right to define marriage as it has always been defined, as the National Organization for Marriage put it.




Justice Anthony M. Kennedy's order came after Idaho filed a request to the Supreme Court for an immediate stay of the appeals court ruling.Justice Kennedy Temporarily Blocks Ruling Allowing Gay Marriage in IdahoOCT. 8, 2014
The Mormon Church, which once helped ban same-sex marriage in California, struck a more conciliatory tone Tuesday.In Utah, the Same-Sex-Union Battle Shifts to AcceptanceOCT. 7, 2014
Groups have been meeting regularly in hopes of breaking the isolation of being gay in a small Southern city. Dealt a Victory in Court, Advocates for Gay Rights Focus on a New FrontierOCT. 7, 2014
Gay Marriage Is Upheld in Nevada and IdahoOCT. 7, 2014
They noted that on Wednesday, Justice Anthony M. Kennedy temporarily blocked a federal appeals court ruling striking down Idaho’s ban on same-sex marriage. The brief order from Justice Kennedy, in response to an emergency request from the state, asks same-sex marriage supporters to offer their argument by Thursday, before he or the full court decides whether to grant a longer stay.


Brian Brown, the president of the National Organization for Marriage, is an opponent of same-sex marriage and said his group would press for a constitutional amendment declaring the right of states to define marriage. 
The marriage battle will continue, said Jim Campbell, a senior legal counsel with Alliance Defending Freedom, a Christian legal group that has defended marriage restrictions in several states.

The cases now making their way through appeals courts, Mr. Campbell said, may well yield one or more decisions in favor of state marriage restrictions and all but force the Supreme Court to take a case for a fuller ruling on the issue.

We hope the Supreme Court will take up this issue, he said.

Advocates for gay rights as well as many independent legal scholars say the opponents are engaged in wishful thinking. They say that the Supreme Court, with Monday’s decision not to intervene in appeals-court findings in favor of same-sex marriage, had knowingly unleashed a current that will be unstoppable.

The shift toward marriage equality is overwhelming, in popular opinion, among elected officials and in the courts, said Suzanne B. Goldberg, the director of the Center for Gender and Sexuality Law at Columbia Law School. It’s extremely hard to imagine that marriage equality won’t be the ultimate national resolution.

The opponents pin their legal hopes in part on the mixed messages in the Supreme Court’s 5-to-4 decision last year, in United States v. Windsor, that struck down part of the Defense of Marriage Act. The majority opinion, as well as the dissenting views, asserted that the states have primary control over marriage policies.

But the majority also stressed that state laws were subject to constitutional protections and went on to find that excluding gay and lesbian couples from marriage caused unjustified injury and stigma to them and their children.

Since that ruling, in June 2013, dozens of federal and state judges, as well as four United States Courts of Appeals so far, have cited those findings about illegal discrimination as they struck down state marriage restrictions. Only one federal judge, in Louisiana, has ruled in favor of a state’s ban on same-sex marriage. The total number of states permitting same-sex marriages is now 25.


Bans appear nearly certain to be overturned soon, as well, in nine more states within the four federal circuits that have ruled so far. One of them, Colorado, has already started issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples. But officials in Kansas, South Carolina and Wyoming said they would fight in court to preserve their bans.

While admitting that Monday’s Supreme Court action was a serious setback, opponents of same-sex marriage found a silver lining in the court’s decision not to hear arguments on the underlying issues.

If the liberals on the court had the votes to declare same-sex marriage a constitutional right, why didn’t they take any of the cases on offer Monday? asked Brian Brown, the president of the National Organization for Marriage.

That gives hope that the Supreme Court will not launch another Roe v. Wade, Mr. Brown said, referring to the 1973 decision legalizing abortion nationwide.

Mr. Brown also rejected the argument that, once same-sex marriages have been allowed in many states, the law could not be rolled back if the voters wanted to. In California, he noted, marriages were allowed by court order, and then halted for a period by Proposition 8.

But most legal experts drew the opposite conclusion from Monday’s action.

We know, from the court’s willingness Monday to allow all these marriages to go forward, that gay marriage opponents are virtually guaranteed to lose before the current Supreme Court, said Michael C. Dorf, a constitutional expert at Cornell Law School.

Whether or not they view Monday’s decision as a turning point, lawyers for both sides are digging in for more court battles at every level. Dozens of challenges to state marriage restrictions are still pending in courts across the country.

Advocates had assumed that most of these cases might be put on hold as the Supreme Court considered one of the cases it rejected on Monday. Now, with the near-term involvement of the Supreme Court uncertain, each one of these cases could be the decider for that state or that circuit, noted James Esseks, director of gay rights issues for the American Civil Liberties Union.

From the litigators’ perspective, he said, Monday’s decision means more work, not less work.

Opponents of same-sex marriage like Mr. Campbell and Mr. Brown say their goal at this point is not to return to the days when it was illegal everywhere, but to allow individual states to decide, whether through legislation or plebiscite. Mr. Brown said his group would also press for a constitutional amendment declaring the right of states to define marriage and in the coming elections would target Republicans who strayed from the traditional line on marriage.

At the same time, Mr. Campbell and others say, they will step up the fight for what they call religious liberty protections — the right of individuals and businesses to refuse to participate in same-sex marriages, which is already a subject of growing litigation.

Some conservative religious leaders, meanwhile, have resigned themselves to the seemingly unstoppable spread of same-sex marriage but call on their followers to prepare for the long haul, responding not with hatred or a siege mentality but with what Russell Moore, chief of the public policy arm of the Southern Baptist Convention, called cultural persuasion.

Let’s articulate a Christian vision of what marriage should be, and let’s embody that vision in our churches, Mr. Moore said in a blog post this week. Let’s love our gay and lesbian neighbors.


DALLAS — Thomas Eric Duncan, 42, the patient with the first case of Ebola diagnosed in the United States and the Liberian man at the center of a widening public health scare, died in isolation at a hospital here on Wednesday, hospital authorities said.

Mr. Duncan died at 7:51 a.m. at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital, more than a week after the virus was detected in him on Sept. 30. His condition had worsened in recent days to critical from serious as medical personnel worked to support his fluid and electrolyte levels, crucial to recovery in a disease that causes bleeding, vomiting and diarrhea. Mr. Duncan was also treated with an experimental antiviral drug, brincidofovir, after the Food and Drug Administration approved its use on an emergency basis.

The past week has been an enormous test of our health system, but for one family it has been far more personal, Dr. David Lakey, the commissioner of the Texas Department of State Health Services, said in a statement. Today they lost a dear member of their family. They have our sincere condolences, and we are keeping them in our thoughts.


How Many Ebola Patients Are Outside of West Africa?

The mayor of Dallas, Mike Rawlings, also offered some assurance to Dallas residents. I remain confident in the abilities of our health care professionals and the medical advances here in the U.S., Mr. Rawlings said, and reassure you we will stop the Ebola virus in its tracks from spreading into our community.

After Mr. Duncan arrived at the Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport on Sept. 20, he set off a chain of events that raised questions about health officials’ preparedness to detect and contain the deadly virus. His case spread fear and anxiety among those he encountered, however briefly, and turned the places, vehicles and items he touched into biohazardous sites that were decontaminated, dismantled, stored or, in some cases, incinerated.


Thomas Duncan was being treated at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas. He died there on Wednesday.  Credit Joe Raedle/Getty Images
Mr. Duncan went to the airport in Liberia on Sept. 19 for his flight to the United States, landed in Dallas the next day and first went to the emergency room at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital feeling ill on Sept. 25. He was released by the hospital, which had failed to view him as a potential Ebola case for reasons that remain unclear. He returned there and was admitted Sept. 28 after his condition worsened.

Mr. Duncan spent nearly two decades separated from the woman he had traveled to Dallas to be with, Louise Troh, 54, with whom he had a son. The couple were apparently rekindling their relationship. Yet in the last days of Mr. Duncan’s life, Mr. Duncan and Ms. Troh remained more apart than together. Each had been quarantined because of the risk of spreading Ebola, Mr. Duncan in virtually his own hospital ward and Ms. Troh in a four-bedroom home on a remote property that state health officials prohibited her, her 13-year-old son and two others from leaving, under threat of prosecution.



 

Mr. Duncan had been a driver at a cargo company in Monrovia, the Liberian capital, living alone in a small room he rented from the parents of Marthalene Williams, 19. A simple act of kindness probably exposed him to the virus that has killed more than 3,000 people in West Africa. In Monrovia, neighbors and Ms. Williams’s parents said Mr. Duncan helped the family take Ms. Williams to and from a hospital on Sept. 15, shortly before she died of Ebola. Some of the men and women who had direct contact with Ms. Williams, and who were also in contact with Mr. Duncan, have also died, including Ms. Williams’s brother, Sonny Boy Williams, 21.


Mr. Duncan helped carry her while she was sick with the virus and convulsing. The disease is contagious only if the infected person is experiencing active symptoms.

For all the hype about Purple Texas, the real front in the Democratic demographic offensive is Georgia.

No other plausibly competitive state has seen a more favorable shift for Democrats in the racial composition of eligible voters over the last decade. The pace of demographic change is so fast that Michelle Nunn, a Democrat, is locked in a tight race against the Republican David Perdue for an open Senate seat — even with an off-year electorate that is favorable for the G.O.P.

The pace of demographic change might even be fast enough to outpace the polls.

Polls show Mr. Perdue leading Ms. Nunn by about three percentage points. The various Senate models, including The Upshot’s, give Ms. Nunn about as good a shot — roughly 20 percent — of winning as Democratic incumbents in Louisiana, Arkansas and Alaska. But there’s reason to wonder whether her chances are better still: Recent polls are most likely underestimating the share of voters who are black, along with Ms. Nunn’s share of the vote.


Michelle Nunn, the Democratic candidate for Senate from Georgia, is locked in a tight race with David Perdue. Credit Erik S. Lesser/European Pressphoto Agency
The best evidence is that most recent polls are based on an electorate that’s no more diverse than in 2010, the last midterm election. In some polls, black voters represent an even smaller share of the electorate than in 2010. But Georgia has clearly become less white in the last four years.

According to data from the Georgia secretary of state, the 2010 electorate was 66.3 percent white and 28.2 percent black. Since then, the white share of registered voters has fallen, to 58 percent from 62.6 percent. White voters turn out at somewhat higher rates than other voters in midterm election, so we should expect the white share of the actual vote to be a little higher. Combining the data on registered voters with census data on the voter-eligible population, I expect the 2014 electorate to be about 64.2 percent white and 28.8 percent black. (Ms. Nunn is expected to win at least 90 percent of the black vote.)

Yet the last four nonpartisan polls that released demographic data showed an electorate that’s 65.7 percent white and 25.7 percent black. Those polls show Mr. Perdue ahead by 3.3 points, but they would show something closer to a dead heat if the likely electorate matched my estimates.

Why do the polls show an electorate that’s no more diverse than 2010, even though there has been considerable demographic change?


Low Estimates of the Black Vote
Recent polls have estimated that black voters in Georgia will represent a smaller share of the electorate than they did in 2010, sometimes by several points.


A bit of the explanation is that the polls are being weighted to census estimates that haven’t kept up with demographic change. Most traditional surveys sponsored by the news media take a random sample of adults and then weight the sample to demographic targets from the census for variables like race, gender and age.

The catch is that the census products aren’t completely up to date. The census itself is now four years old, and the most recent estimates for 2013 just came out last month.

The exact targets for demographic weighting don’t usually make a discernible difference in the polls. Neither does the age of the product, which is invariably a year or even a few years out of date. But Georgia is perhaps the single state where it would make a noticeable difference, because of the degree of racial polarization and the pace of demographic change.


How far behind are the estimates? Over the last five years, the white share of adults declined by about half a point a year. That starts to add up if a poll is weighting to the 2010 census, as SurveyUSA or NBC/Marist do. The white share of Georgia adults has probably dropped by about two points since.


THE UPSHOT
In a weekly e-mail newsletter, get the best of The Upshot's analysis about politics, policy and everyday life.


Pollsters can choose to weight to more recent targets, like the American Community Survey, a large annual survey conducted by the Census Bureau. But the survey isn’t released until the year after sampling; the 2013 A.C.S. was released just a few weeks ago. The pollsters using the A.C.S. for weighting — like The Atlanta Journal-Constitution/SRBI and the CBS/NYT/YouGov poll — were using the slightly older 2012 survey. The 2013 A.C.S. is already a half-point more diverse than the 2012 version, and there’s another year of demographic change yet to be measured.

But this factor doesn’t fully explain the low estimated share of the black vote.



I don't quite understand why the entire South hasn't been voting Democrat in large numbers for the last 50 years. What has the Republican...
Margo 18 minutes ago
The good old boy mentality is going to hit a wall soon. The dirty ads plus the image of Perdue as a businessman interested only in...
Michael F 
So you still expect all black people to vote as a block. If all white people voted like that this paper would be screaming bloody murder.

A few possibilities might explain the rest of the difference. One of those is a technique known as trimming weights — in which pollsters don’t weight underrepresented groups up to their targets because it would require individual respondents to be weighted too heavily.

Pollsters often choose to trim weights if a single respondent starts getting weighted more than a few times over. Often, this involves undersampled demographic groups that lean Democratic, like young and nonwhite voters. As a result, many surveys fall a bit short of their targets for nonwhite voters; it was one of the many reasons the Gallup poll fell short of its targets for nonwhite voters in 2012.


Midterm Elections 2014
 
The latest news, analysis and election results for the 2014 midterm campaign.

Another possibility is that the likely-voter screens — in which pollsters estimate who will vote and who won’t — are excluding too many black registered voters, either because the screens are too tight or because Democratic mobilization efforts aren’t yet underway.

One pollster has raised this possibility. Mark Schulman, chief research officer at Abt SRBI, noted that The Atlanta Journal-Constitution/SRBI poll applied a fairly tight likely-voter screen (eliminating people who said they were less engaged in the election, for example). Black voters represented 24 percent of the electorate in the poll, compared with 28 percent in 2010. Mr. Perdue led by four points; it would have been a dead heat if the black share of the electorate were four points higher.

Of course, the black share of the electorate might not stay as high in 2014 as the 28.2 percent share in 2010. Black turnout, for instance, might well go up, but white turnout might go up even more. But we can safely dismiss the possibility that the black share of the electorate will crash into the mid-20s — and that’s where several of the most recent polls put it.

None of this should be interpreted to mean that Ms. Nunn is the favorite, nor should it be interpreted to mean that she’s assured to do better than the polls suggest. Changes in voter sentiment, or the possibility that the polls aren’t accurately measuring voter sentiment in the first place, could easily cancel out any benefits that Ms. Nunn might accrue from a more diverse electorate.

Even if Ms. Nunn does win on Nov. 4, she probably won’t receive the 50 percent necessary to avoid a January runoff. I don’t hear very many Democratic pollsters or campaign operatives screaming about how Ms. Nunn is really in the lead, either.

But there isn’t much question that the most recent polls underrepresent the nonwhite share of the Georgia electorate. Even if there’s something else wrong with the polls that cancels it out, it’s another reminder of the mounting methodological challenges facing pollsters in an era when random sampling is no guarantee of a representative sample. Weighting isn’t always easy; neither are likely-voter screens.


HOUSTON — The Singapore-flagged tanker BW Zambesi set sail with little fanfare from the port of Galveston, Tex., on July 30, loaded with crude oil destined for South Korea. But though it left inauspiciously, the ship’s launch was another critical turning point in what has been a half-decade of tectonic change for the American oil industry.

The 400,000 barrels the tanker carried represented the first unrestricted export of American oil to a country outside of North America in nearly four decades. The Obama administration insisted there was no change in energy trade policy, perhaps concerned about the reaction from environmentalists and liberal members of Congress with midterm elections coming. But many energy experts viewed the launch as the curtain raiser for the United States’ inevitable emergence as a major world oil exporter, an improbable return to a status that helped make the country a great power in the first half of the 20th century.




The Valero refinery, in South Texas, is above the Eagle Ford shale field.Energy Special Section
In October 1956, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, center, spoke at the United Nations on the Suez crisis. Later, the United States would use threats to withhold oil from Britain and France to force an end to their attempt to seize the Suez Canal.Oil’s Comeback Gives U.S. Global Leverage
The German engineering conglomerate Siemens agreed to pay more than $6 billion for Dresser-Rand, a Houston-based maker of equipment used for hydraulic fracturing.Energy Mergers Born of a Production Boom
The Sabine Pass natural gas liquefaction facility being constructed in Cameron Parish, La., for Cheniere Energy, which is expected to become the first large-scale exporter of L.N.G. in the United States.One Key to Exports: Liquid Gas
Employees of Solar City install photovoltaic panels on the roof of a house in San Leandro, Calif. Most solar panels face south, the direction that will catch the maximum energy when the sun rises in the southeast and sets in the southwest.How Grid Efficiency Went SouthO
Duke Energy added battery storage (yellow building) to a wind farm in Notrees, Tex. TEnergy for a Rainy Day, or a Windless On
A section of the One Nevada Transmission Line near Coyote Springs, Nev.Warren Buffett’s Big Bet on Renewables in Nevada
Levi’s Stadium, the 49ers’ new home in Santa Clara, Calif., has received a coveted green certification in part because of efforts to use less water in a drought-stricken area. Other arenas are also cutting back on water use.Water Waste: Going, Going ...
A flight operated by the Brazilian low-fare airline GOL, top, flew from Florida to São Paulo, Brazil, on a 10 percent blend of a liquid called farnesane and jet fuel.Airlines Fly the Skies on a Sugar High
The export shipment symbolizes a new era in U.S. energy and U.S. energy relations with the rest of the world, said Daniel Yergin, the energy historian. Economically, it means that money that was flowing out of the United States into sovereign wealth funds and treasuries around the world will now stay in the U.S. and be invested in the U.S., creating jobs. It doesn’t change everything, but it certainly provides a new dimension to U.S. influence in the world.

Like just about everything else in the oil and gas business, petroleum exports are contentious. The oil bounty is thanks to modern production techniques including hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, which involves injecting water and chemicals into the ground to crack oil-saturated shale. Exports would mean more of that. Many environmentalists say fracking operations endanger water supplies or create other hazards, including air pollution. Ramping up exports of fossil fuels, critics will surely note, is inconsistent with the Obama administration’s push for a global climate deal.


The Valero refinery, in South Texas, is above the Eagle Ford shale field. Credit Michael Stravato for The New York Times
Independent refiners argue that exports could mean more expensive domestic oil for them, which they say could mean higher prices for American consumers.

Oil companies, and many independent economists, say just the opposite is true, because American exports would add to global supplies and lower international oil benchmark prices that ultimately determine the rise and fall of American gasoline prices. And with Russia causing mischief in Europe and the Middle East in turmoil, many analysts say allies would be happy to have a dependable supplier of oil. The oil companies appear to be grinding out a road to victory just as they have gained momentum in promoting natural gas exports against the opposition of some chemical companies and environmental groups that want to curb drilling and fracking. The Energy Department has begun a major study on the merits of exports, and how they would affect American consumers and United States energy security. Their previous study on gas exports backed the industry position.


A global oil price collapse, as unlikely as that might seem, is a wild card that could change the equation and stem momentum toward exports. Low prices, because of either excess supplies or reduced demand, would discourage investments and drilling worldwide.

Whatever the merits, the prospect of the United States becoming a major oil exporter was unthinkable as recently as 2008, when the conventional wisdom had it that the country was addicted — a word that even President George W. Bush famously used — to imported oil from unstable or unfriendly countries. Domestic production had been in free fall for decades as repeated presidential promises of energy independence echoed hollowly. But then came the frenzy of drilling in shale oil and gas fields across the country.

Domestic oil production has rocketed by roughly 70 percent over the last six years to 8.7 million barrels a day, and imports from members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries have already been cut roughly by half. With domestic oil production growing month after month, many oil experts predict that the country’s output will rise to as much as 12 million barrels a day over the next decade, which would mean the country will be swimming in oil the way it is currently dealing with a surplus of natural gas.

Analysts at Turner, Mason & Company, a Dallas engineering consulting firm, say the country could hit a saturation point when production hits 10 million to 10.5 million barrels a day, at which point large exports will become necessary or drilling and production may have to slow.

A flood is upon us, John Auers, a Turner, Mason senior vice president, recently told energy executives at a Houston oil conference. We are getting close.

The country will continue to import some grades of oil for years to come, but energy experts says oil exports should rise significantly over the next few years because of a mismatch in the type of oil the country now increasingly produces and the mix of oil its refineries were designed to process. Shale oil is predominately light, sweet oil, meaning it is low in sulfur content and flows freely at room temperature. American refineries can refine only so much of it because they were structured to process abundant amounts of much heavier crudes imported from Mexico, Venezuela and Canada. That is leading to a crude-oil glut in parts of the country’s midsection already — which has pushed oil companies to lobby for expanded exports and directly led to that recent shipment from Galveston.



The United States has strictly limited exports since the Arab oil embargo, when President Jimmy Carter wore a cardigan sweater to encourage lower thermostats. 
The Galveston sailing was historic because the United States has strictly limited exports since the era of the Arab oil embargo, when President Jimmy Carter wore a cardigan sweater to encourage lower thermostats and other measures to limit the country’s dependence on foreign oil. In sweeping legislation, Congress in 1975 directed the president to prohibit the export of oil as consistent with the national interest, although broad exemptions were allowed. Various administrations since then have permitted limited exports, including shipments from Alaska’s Cook Inlet and to Canada, but the issue rarely came up because the country was seemingly running out of oil.


Then suddenly the energy world changed, and parts of the Midwest and the Gulf of Mexico regions were overflowing with light grades of crude, leading to a slump in prices and a gap of as much as $15 between the United States oil benchmark and the prevailing Brent world price. Unable to export the excess light crude, the industry exported refined products like gasoline and diesel instead. In 2011, the country pivoted from being the world’s largest importer of petroleum products to becoming one of the leading exporters.

But the buildup in light crude has continued to outpace the capacity of refiners to process and export it, and that has spurred new thinking in Washington. In what appeared to be a trial balloon, Energy Secretary Ernest Moniz last December suggested to reporters at a New York energy conference that it may be time for the administration to reconsider the export ban. There are lots of issues in the energy space that deserve some new analysis and examination in the context of what is now an energy world that is no longer like the 1970s, Mr. Moniz said at the time.


Energy Secretary Ernest Moniz has discussed reconsidering the export ban. 
The first baby step toward a new policy came in June when the Commerce Department approved applications from two Texas energy companies, Pioneer Natural Resources and Enterprise Products Partners, to export light liquid hydrocarbons known as condensates that are normally characterized as crude oil even though they share attributes of both oil and natural gas and normally are found in gas form in the ground. The government ruled that since the companies had minimally processed the condensates through a simple oil processing unit that separates the gas and makes it safe for transport, the result was now considered a refined product.

Since refined products like gasoline and diesel are legal to export, the Obama administration said that the decision did not signal a reversal of the crude oil trade limits. Nevertheless, oil company executives and many Wall Street analysts who follow the oil industry interpreted the move as being a fundamental shift in direction. The country can now potentially export 300,000 barrels a day of condensates, most of which come out of the Eagle Ford shale oil field of South Texas, easing some of the glut of a product refiners cannot absorb and thus improving the profitability of drilling in the zone.

But the wording of the Commerce Department ruling means oil producers can potentially export much more than just condensates, since the department said it covered all crude oil that is processed through a distillation unit. Basic distillation can occur at the wellhead at minimal cost, and the new interpretation is likely to unleash investment in basic processing of oil in the field to meet the export requirements.

It was another crack in a process that is historic, said Eric G. Lee, a commodities strategist at Citigroup.

Oil exports (including condensates) remain small, but they have already surged from 67,000 barrels a day in 2012 to 120,000 barrels a day in 2013 to more than double that currently. Citi Research estimates that under the new condensates ruling, exports could hit a million barrels a day by next year.


Last month, the first tanker since 2004 loaded with Alaskan North Slope crude for export set sail — 800,000 barrels purchased by South Korea. While Alaskan crude is excluded from the current ban, the shipment showed that West Coast refineries that normally buy the Alaskan oil have ample supplies from the Lower 48. Much of the additional exported oil is expected to go to Canada and Mexico, also allowable under current restrictions, but the export growth will probably not be enough to dent the continuing upsurge in domestic production for more than a few years at most.

Another way the country is easing some of the glut is by exporting more refined products like gasoline and diesel. Exports of refined petroleum products have already soared to 3.4 million barrels a day from 2.3 million barrels a day in 2010. But most oil experts say that growth in such exports will be limited by United States refinery capacity and available export markets, especially if refineries planned in Latin America — a major market for American products — are completed.

That will leave exports of crude to soak up the excess production, but there are still political hurdles. United States exports of oil could reach three million to four million barrels a day in a few years, more than most OPEC producers currently provide world markets.




Less Coming In, More Heading Out
MILLIONS OF
BARRELS PER DAY
Average daily crude oil imports peaked in 2005, when exports of American-produced petroleum products began to rise. American crude exports are set to rise sharply too.
 
Petroleum products include gasoline and diesel and jet fuel.


Most oil experts say that a loosening of the export limitations will have to wait until at least the midterm elections and maybe even until after the 2016 presidential election campaign, when the issue will probably be amply discussed.

The politics are hard, said David L. Goldwyn, the State Department’s coordinator for international energy affairs in the first Obama administration. But he added, When the economics become overwhelming, the politics will shift.

For Mr. Goldwyn, American oil exports would increase Washington’s credibility in global trade talks, where the nation typically argues that countries with excess supplies should export them. They would allow China and India to diversify their supplies from the Middle East, and Europe to diversify from Russia, the Middle East and North Africa. Adding United States oil to world supplies would bring down the global Brent oil price benchmark, which would bolster the world economy, they argue.

The refiners disagree that American consumers would benefit, especially those who live in the Northeast and along the West Coast, who get their fuels from local refineries. Those coastal refineries depend on low domestic prices to offset high transport costs since they are so far from the Texas and North Dakota shale oil fields. With insufficient pipelines, coastal refineries are obliged under current maritime laws to transport domestic oil in a most expensive fashion — by barges that must be American-built and flagged; majority American-owned and manned by crews that are predominately American.


More United States exports would almost certainly raise domestic oil prices to the higher levels on the world market, refiners argue, forcing the coastal refineries to raise their gasoline prices and making it more difficult for them to compete against foreign refiners on world markets. For Bill Day, a Valero vice president, those who argue for free trade in oil are missing the point that the international oil business is inherently not free because prices are largely controlled by OPEC and others who do not believe in free trade. To us this should be a question of economics, pragmatism and good business sense rather than ideology, Mr. Day said.

The refiners are joined in an unlikely alliance by congressional liberals like Senator Edward Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, who argue that an extra couple of million barrels a day of American production will not bring down global oil prices as long as OPEC remains in a dominant position to manipulate prices by increasing or decreasing output at will. Senator Markey noted that the United States still imports a third of the oil it uses, about the same proportion as when Congress limited exports 39 years ago.

Many oil experts say that the debate will be settled when American oil production rises to such a high level that there are no longer adequate domestic markets for the sweet crude oil produced in the shale fields. That could happen as soon as 2017, some oil executives say. The telltale sign of a glut will be a collapse in the West Texas Intermediate price, the principal American oil benchmark price, which is currently about $3 below the world Brent price. That differential has been as high as $28 in recent years, but has been relieved by additional pipelines bringing American production to domestic markets and refineries for export of finished products.

If the spread cracks open, the economic arguments for free export of domestic crude will probably win the day, many energy experts say, while a narrower spread would keep the debate going. Many oil experts say it is only a matter of time before a much steeper spread emerges — leading to trouble for an industry that has done much to keep the national economy afloat in recent years. Gluts of domestic oil are already mounting in West Texas.

You would see a significant reduction in drilling, resulting in a significant reduction in production, a significant reduction in employment in the industry, predicted Scott Sheffield, chief executive of Pioneer Natural Resources, one of the two companies that won the initial condensate export approvals.

The White House and Congress would not let that happen, oil executives say.

Not surprisingly, Senator Markey took a different view: They claim that exporting American oil to China will be good for oil companies and there will be no impact on American consumers and industries and our national security. If something sounds too good to be true, it probably is.

Three scientists, two American and one German, have received this year’s Nobel Prize in Chemistry for, in effect, circumventing a basic law of physics and enabling optical microscopes to peer at the tiniest structures within living cells.

The 2014 laureates, announced Wednesday morning, are Eric Betzig of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute in Virginia; Stefan W. Hell of the Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry in Germany; and William E. Moerner of Stanford University in California.

In its citation, the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, which awards the prize, said the three were being honored for the development of super-resolved fluorescence microscopy, which allows the molecular processes to be viewed in real time.

At a news conference after the announcement in Sweden, Dr. Hell said, I was totally surprised.


From left, the researchers Isamu Akasaki, Hiroshi Amano and Shuji Nakamura were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for the invention of efficient blue light-emitting diodes, which has enabled bright and energy-saving white light sources.American and 2 Japanese Physicists Share Nobel for Work on LED LightsOCT. 7, 2014
John O'Keefe, Edvard Moser, and May-Britt Moser, from left, were announced as winners of the Nobel Prize in Medicine on Monday.Nobel Prize in Medicine Is Awarded to Three Who Discovered Brain’s ‘Inner GPS’OCT. 6, 2014
In an interview, Dr. Betzig said he had learned the news in a phone call in Munich, where he was attending a conference. He said his reaction was I guess elation and fear — the fear that being my life is busy enough and happy enough, and it doesn’t need to be perturbed too much.



An image of the nuclear pore complexes in frog skin cells, which was produced using technique called stimulated emission depletion microscopy developed by Stefan W. Hell. Credit Stefan W. Hell
The committee was not able to reach Dr. Moerner before making the announcement. I actually still haven’t a chance to talk to them, Dr. Moerner said Wednesday morning from a hotel room in Brazil, where he is attending a scientific workshop.

He said his wife had called to tell him the news.

For centuries, optical microscopes have allowed biologists to study organisms too small to be seen with the naked eye. But a fundamental law of optics known as the diffraction limit states that the resolution can never be better than half the wavelength of light being looked at.

For optical wavelengths, that limit is about 0.2 millionths of a meter, or one 127-thousandth of an inch. A human hair is about 100 millionths of a meter wide. But a bacterium is about the size of the diffraction limit, and could be seen only as a blob.

The researchers could not break the laws of physics. But, working separately, they realized they could work around the diffraction limit if they could make parts of the molecules glow.


By lighting up and then turning off parts of the organism, they could combine images that brought the tiniest of molecules into clear view. That now allows biologists to look at the mechanism of how DNA folds and unfolds within living cells, for example.



The three laureates have themselves employed their innovations to study biology at the smallest scales. Dr. Hell has studied how brain synapses work, Dr. Moerner has looked at proteins related to Huntington’s disease and Dr. Betzig has tracked cell division inside embryos.

Biology has turned into chemistry, said Sven Lidin, chairman of the Nobel Committee for Chemistry and a professor of inorganic chemistry at Lund University. Chemistry has turned into biology.

The three scientists will share a prize of $1.1 million, to be awarded in Stockholm on Dec. 10.


MURSITPINAR, Turkey — Gun battles and explosions echoed from the embattled Syrian Kurdish town of Kobani on Wednesday, as Islamic State militants detonated a car bomb and new American-led airstrikes hit the northern edge of the town, close to the Turkish border.

A Kurdish official in Kobani, Assi Abdullah, said that despite the bombing, Islamic State fighters had managed to enter new areas of the town and move north, closer to the border.

That development, along with what could be seen of the fighting from across the border, suggested that two days of intensive airstrikes had failed to turn back the militants. Kurdish fighters, as well as Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, have said that airstrikes alone will not stop the attackers.



Turkey has also balked at deeper involvement with the American-led coalition against the Islamic State, urging President Obama to focus on ousting the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, and calling for an international no-fly zone and buffer area along the Syrian border, not necessarily in Kobani.

Secretary of State John Kerry said Wednesday that preventing the town’s fall to Islamic State militants was not a strategic objective for the United States.

As horrific as it is to watch in real time what is happening in Kobani, Mr. Kerry said at a news conference with the British foreign secretary in Washington, you have to step back and understand the strategic objective. He added that the focus had been on the militants’ command and control centers, the infrastructure.

Ms. Abdullah, the Kurdish official in Kobani, said by telephone that 15 civilians had been killed since militants entered the town. We still have thousands of civilians inside Kobani who might be massacred if ISIS takes the city, she said, using a former acronym for the Islamic State.

As an indication of the complex political currents, however, she made it clear the Kurds would not welcome military assistance from Turkey, asking instead for free passage of Kurdish fighters from Turkey to reinforce those in Kobani.

We would view Turkey sending its troops without an international decision as an occupation," she said. "Turkey can help in a different way by allowing support to come through its territory. All the talk by Turkey about helping us is still words and not actions.

Anwar Muslim, a lawyer and the head of the Kobani district, echoed those sentiments, saying it was illogical to ask the Kurds to denounce Mr. Assad and join Syrian insurgent groups fighting against him.

We don’t deal with the Syrian regime, and our borders with Turkey have always been quiet, he said in a telephone interview. We wish that Turkey would allow fighters from Qamishli to come through its territory, he added, referring to a Syrian Kurdish area now cut off from Kobani, and wish it had been earnest about standing by the Kurds against ISIS.


It was difficult to gauge the direction of the battle in Kobani on Wednesday. For the first time in days, there was no shelling of the town. Kurdish fighters and officials reached inside Kobani early Wednesday said that Tuesday’s airstrikes, the most intense so far, had kept the militants from advancing beyond their foothold southwest of the town.

Sounds to me like we need to undertake more airstrikes. It'd be nice if there were any other way of dealing with these barbarians, but...
William Alan Shirley 13 minutes ago
Obama brought together a great coalition for airstrikes. But fighters on the ground are needed.Turkey won't allow help from the Kurds and...

Define "intensive air strikes" and when they occurred. Not reporting, Press Release stenography.

By Wednesday afternoon, though, as plumes of smoke rose above the town, the same people sounded more anxious on the phone. One large explosion, initially thought to be an airstrike, was claimed by Islamic State militants as a suicide car bombing. Ms. Abdullah, the Kurdish official, said the bomb hit a police station where Kurdish fighters were stationed. It was unclear if there were casualties.

Coalition airstrikes continued into the late afternoon, sending towering columns of dust into the air and black smoke across the border.

More than 186,000 Syrians have fled to Turkey over the last three weeks, as Islamic State militants have pressed their offensive in and around Kobani. More than 200 Syrians who crossed the border in recent days have been detained by the Turkish authorities, who have questioned them about their ties to the Kurdish militants defending the town, known as the People’s Protection Committees, or Y.P.G.

On Wednesday, the Turkish government was forced to contend with an outburst of protests in several Turkish cities with large Kurdish populations. Turkey’s military imposed a curfew in parts of the southeast after at least 18 people were killed in demonstrations over the government’s failure to aid Kobani. It was the first time such a curfew had been imposed since a bloody Kurdish insurgency was tamped down in the 1990s.

The violence was the worst in years related to Turkey’s restive Kurdish minority, jeopardizing a fragile peace process. Protests also took place in Istanbul, Ankara and elsewhere. The worst rioting was in Diyarbakir, in southeastern Turkey, where at least 10 people died. Some of the deaths came in clashes between Kurdish activists and members of a Kurdish Islamist group sympathetic to the Islamic State.

There’s a photo from 1978 of my daughter Kate, taken at about 6 months old. She’s sitting in a highchair, waving a stalk of broccoli in the air and grinning. I’d forgotten that shot, but looking at it recently — Kate, who has become the family historian, frequently pulls out pictures for the rest of us to enjoy — I recognize how unusual it was then and remains now: a baby eating not only normal food but a food that kids normally despise.




Bittman’s daughter Kate chose lobster for her 7th-birthday dinner. Credit Photograph from Kate Bittman
Because Karen and I were making dinner almost every night, it seemed only natural to feed Kate — and later Emma — the same things we ourselves ate. That meant meals ranging from Japanese mixed-rice dishes and salt-grilled mackerel to eggplant and tomatoes with pasta; from pork with cabbage or rosemary or potatoes to roast chicken with vegetables. I spent long stretches focusing on Marcella Hazan, Julie Sahni, Shizuo Tsuji, James Beard, Pierre Franey and scores of other cookbook authors.

Even given my limited skills, the results were not only somewhat exotic, especially by the standards of the day, but unusually varied, even by today’s. When I recently asked my daughters what they liked to eat as kids, some of it was surprising: Kate said, risotto with Parmesan rind; Emma, roast cod on potatoes (which I named Emma’s Cod in cookbooks). But much of it was mundane, like steak with ketchup or baked mac and cheese — though, Kate said, pointedly, You hardly ever made that.

Today my daughters — now 36 and 29 — are healthy women who, as far as I can tell, have healthy relationships with food. They both eat at home more often than not, they both shop for real food and they both cook. They have even gotten their partners into cooking. (My daughters cook in quite different styles, which — perhaps not surprisingly — mimic my own style when each was young; that is, Kate follows recipes while Emma improvises.) Each will eat almost everything, including the occasional Wendy’s Jr. Bacon Cheeseburger, though Emma refuses to acknowledge that she likes chocolate; I’m working on that.

The way I cooked for my daughters was a reaction, at least in part, to how my mother cooked for me. Like the mothers of my friends, mine made dinner almost every night, a predictable rotation of lamb chops, steak, hamburgers, beef stew, meatloaf (with an impossibly dry hard-boiled egg in the middle) and overcooked chicken, all served with potatoes, usually mashed; canned vegetables; an iceberg lettuce salad with Wish-Bone dressing; and fruit, sometimes fresh but more often canned. (I will say that my mother made a mean sliced tri-tip and some of the best French fries imaginable.) I used to make fun of her food, but with cooking, showing up is half the battle, and she always showed up.


The other meals of the day were the real problem. Breakfast was an at least eat something situation, so when I took up a daily regimen of a glass of milk and a handful of cookies — Mallomars, when in season — my mother was grateful that I wasn’t leaving the house with an empty stomach. (The most recent research suggests that skipping breakfast does not quite guarantee that you’ll be a failure in life. Regardless, it’s safe to say that if you’re going to feed your kids breakfast, you should steer clear of pure sugar, which means much of what’s sold in the cereal aisle.)

Kate, left, and Emma celebrate their father’s book in 1998. Credit Photograph from Kate Bittman
Between breakfast and dinner, my own taste buds ruled. Candy cost either a penny or a nickel, and pennies and nickels were plentiful, so I could easily get my fill of wax lips, Pixy Stix and candy bars, not to mention Manhattan street food. There were hot dogs (kosher, of course), griddled and served on toasted buns; pizza with a crisp crust; fatty corned beef on rye bread with spicy mustard; and burgers cooked rare and served with fries. Then, if I was home after school, I pretended to do homework while snacking — a roll of Ritz crackers, a seven-ounce bag of chips or pretzels, some more cookies or whatever junk food I had persuaded my mother to buy for us.

Current research shows snacking and grazing are perfectly acceptable styles of eating, but much of the snack food I consumed was hyperprocessed junk. And my binges inevitably spoiled my appetite for my mother’s relatively healthful if uninspired dinner, ultimately damaging my relationship with both of my parents, who were incredulous that I could leave so much food on my plate — food I would have eaten if only I had not gorged on junk food all day.

I’ve had struggles with diet and health, about which I’ve written plenty, and I’m sure they stem — as they do for many people — from my undisciplined, eat-everything childhood. Given the problems I had, I think it was easy for Karen and me to see that the key to getting our daughters to eat well was to offer a broad variety of foods, let them discover what they liked, put few restrictions on when and where they ate (although there was no eating while watching TV) and keep junk food out of the house. We didn’t base these rules on any science or research, but everything I’ve read since then on the subject makes me think they’re still worth following.

The first thing to note about this system was that even though it was accepted, it wasn’t entirely popular. Kate and Emma like to claim that when they were around 13 and 6 and I was working on my first cookbook, Fish, I fed them squid every night for two weeks. (This is ridiculous; it couldn’t have been more than three or four times a week.) But they eventually became squid connoisseurs, and looking back, I find it remarkable how few foods they resisted. I recently brought up this Fish period with Kate, and she said, I do remember you coming home with octopus and putting it in the sink for dinner and me being like, ‘Oh, hell no!’ I ate hot dogs that night. Emma also refused to eat octopus until she became an adult. But other than that, I can’t think of a single ingredient that the kids really detested for long, and neither can they. (Though Emma did say, I had a hard time with mushrooms for a while, and spinach when I was really little.)


On the occasions when they refused to eat what we prepared, we simply told them to make something for themselves. They had to choose from options that you might call healthful — a sandwich, a yogurt (maybe with honey) or some cheese and crackers. They were not free to ask for special treatment or substitute junk food for the real food I had cooked. (Their friends got special treatment, though; for a time Kate’s friend Alex ate only cereal and milk, and Emma’s pal Abbie could demand white rice. I wasn’t going to deal with tantrumming children who weren’t mine.)


‘I do remember you coming home with octopus and putting it in the sink for dinner and me being like, Oh, hell no! I ate hot dogs that night.’



But there was essentially no junk food in the house. We did not even buy sweetened breakfast cereals. More often than not, I made our granola or bought some lightly sweetened stuff at the health-food store, which Kate and Emma didn’t like all that much. (Often their first request when we went on vacation was whether we could buy vacation cereal, which meant something like Froot Loops.) We didn’t fill our freezer with premade dinners, though we did have hot dogs, which remain a personal weakness. We always had bread and peanut butter and cheese, so no one starved, and by a very young age, they had each learned to prepare simple pasta and bean dishes. (Emma still makes for herself what I call Tuscan-style beans, white beans with loads of olive oil, a little garlic, salt and sage.)

Although there was a brief period during which Emma ran a Tuesday Night Cafe, putting together a short menu in the morning and coming home in the afternoon to prepare dinner with me, there were no formal cooking lessons. It was simply a house where cooking was the norm. The girls were expected to help clean up, and sometimes we asked them to do something while we were getting things ready. Really, though, we just fed them.

At least occasionally, they’d come home from school complaining about lunch. I actually remember being embarrassed by my school lunches, Kate told me. It would be serious wheat bread — like hard — with all-natural P.B. & J. Totally dry and not at all gushy like everyone else’s. And a piece of fruit and a juice box and — this was the part that killed me — one small cookie. Everyone else would have, like, four or five. It felt like, What’s the point? Emma concurred: It was that sandwich or leftovers. Like, a giant Tupperware of pasta. And everyone else had bologna sandwiches.

They would have killed for a bologna sandwich. In retrospect, I’m almost sorry we didn’t cave in more; they were probably eating well 95 percent of the time. But I actually don’t think they missed junk food that much.

Today barely a week goes by without some friend or colleague approaching me with a look of concern and asking, How and what am I supposed to feed my kids? It’s important to remember that Karen’s and my success in feeding our children was more intuitive than intentional, and the ’80s and ’90s were a simpler time than today; feeding children and raising children who appreciate real food is more difficult than ever. In part, this is because there are so many elements that are out of our control. Food companies spend billions of dollars a year marketing junk food to children and fast food to everyone; they’ve made certain that snacks and sugar-sweetened beverages are available practically everywhere.


But after my success with Kate and Emma, I try to provide concrete advice: Parents should purge their cabinets and shopping lists of junk, and they should set and enforce rules on what their children are allowed to eat. I can be even more specific: Teach your kids to snack on carrots and celery and fruit and hummus and guacamole — things made from fruits and vegetables and beans and grains. Offer these things all the time. Make sure breakfast and lunch are made up of items you would eat when you’re feeling good about your diet. Make a real dinner from scratch as often as you can. Worry less about labels like G.M.O. and organic and local and more about whether the food you’re giving your children is real.

Parents need discipline, strength, a plan and determination. But they need a more supportive environment too, because the battle over feeding children really pits Big Food against parents, and Big Food’s resources are vast: almost unlimited money, little regulation and tacit government support. Parents, meanwhile, are busy and bombarded by misleading ads. They want to make their child happy, and it’s hard to say no when the child insists that a Happy Meal will do just that. What American parents need is support in the form of a food policy that encourages the production and sale of real food and strongly reduces the ability of food marketers to peddle their junk to children. Another thing that would be great? Let’s make cooking lessons (and good old home ec) in school standard, not a rarity. Not every parent can be a cookbook author, after all.

Mark Bittman is a columnist for The New York Times. His newest cookbook is How to Cook Everything Fast.

More than four decades ago, Alice Waters, a pioneer of farm-fresh California cuisine, opened Chez Panisse in a jewel-box Craftsman-style building just north of downtown Berkeley. Other outstanding food purveyors followed, but this being a university town, Berkeley’s culinary landscape remained heavily colonized by frozen yogurt vendors and cheap burrito and ramen joints. But a recent spate of openings, from a shochu-focused Japanese tavern to a modern Mexican restaurant serving tlayuda and house-made sangrita al fresco, have filled in the gaps, expanding and elevating the dining options available in newly stylish pockets of downtown. They’re all worthy, grown-up stops to pepper a weekend spent exploring this vibrant college community, rich as ever with music, independent bookstores and cafe culture. Rest assured that the hippie spirit is alive and well in the barefoot buskers and longhaired denizens biking through town.



No visit to Berkeley is complete without an idyllic stroll under the canopy of old-growth oaks, redwoods and 200-foot eucalyptus trees on the beautiful University of California campus. It’s also an excellent place to survey notable buildings designed by the architects John Galen Howard, Bernard Maybeck and Julia Morgan. For a singular view of the famous Campanile — at 307 feet, it’s the third-tallest carillon and clock tower in the world — take a dip in the rooftop swimming pool in the Hearst Gymnasium. Designed by Maybeck and Morgan, the former women’s gym has three pools; the largest, North Pool, was once used for women’s lifesaving classes and is open to the public with $12 day pass. On the sun-warmed marble pool deck, decorated with cherubs and other ornate statuary, visitors are treated to a tree-level sight line punctuated by the Campanile and other university buildings.


A half-block from the eucalyptus grove, step off the student-clogged stretch of Center Street and through the black-and-white curtains at Ippuku, where a top-notch selection of sake, shochu and craft beer anchors the front bar, and a deep menu of Japanese small plates can keep you occupied for hours. The long, skinny dining room is a warren of intimate, curtained booths for two and larger, wood-screened tables, ideal for groups, where you remove your shoes. The warm staff is happy to introduce novices to the savory pleasures of casual izakaya-style dining: chicken gizzard skewers, bacon-wrapped mochi, corn fritters, soft-cooked eggs in dashi broth. Three preparations of fresh handmade soba are available on Monday and Tuesday nights. Try the refreshing shochu cocktails made with grapefruit and umeboshi plum.


John Paluska has an interesting pedigree for a restaurateur: For 17 years, he was the manager for the band Phish. He brings Matt Gandin, former chef of San Francisco’s beloved Delfina, into the mix for his latest project, Comal, an upscale Mexican restaurant and cocktail bar with an emphasis on Oaxacan-inspired cuisine: white shrimp ceviche, rock cod tacos with spicy pickled cabbage, spit-roasted whole chicken served family-style with black beans, achiote rice. Rich mole sauces and three kinds of salsa are frequent accompaniments. At the wood-clad bar at the rear of the long, high-ceilinged industrial space, cocktails are expertly prepared with a bit of theater (lots of vigorous two-handed shaking), and they are fierce (the Jack Satan cocktail is made with infierno tincture, as well as tequila, hibiscus syrup, lime and salt). On busy nights, a cocktail and chips cart goes around the open-air back patio, ferrying margaritas and guacamole to grateful patrons waiting to be seated. The music is always good.



In the early 20th century, the hill areas of Berkeley were just starting to be developed. The challenge of building streets along contoured land made for long, winding blocks, and pathways sprang up to offer shortcuts between them. These days, there is an extensive system of 136 pedestrian paths, historic staircases and walkways, each assigned official names and numbers by the city. They include greenways, bike paths and leafy, meandering steps up to parks, gardens, trails and rock-climbing areas; for example, the 183 concrete steps up Tamalpais Path lead past a waterfall and fern grotto to a redwood-framed view of Mount Tamalpais itself. The Berkeley Path Wanderers Association puts out a terrific map of all the secret routes and corridors; pick up a copy and set out on your own, or sign up for one of the group’s regular guided walks.


The Cheese Board Collective has been a worker-owned-and-operated business since 1971. It has expanded from a cheese shop to include a bakery, espresso bar and an inventive pizzeria that turns out a different kind of pie every day (check the website for the week’s menu; one recent offering featured corn, pasilla pepper, onion, mozzarella, feta, garlic olive oil, cilantro and lime). Be sure to check in at the cheese counter — there is a rotating selection of 300 to 400 cheeses you can taste — before heading next door to the pizzeria for lunch and live music.



One of the most magnificent views of San Francisco Bay can be found at the Lawrence Hall of Science, the university’s public science museum and educational research center, just a five-minute drive uphill from the main campus. Take a walk around the expansive pedestrian plaza for a look at the shifting panorama of San Francisco and its bridges (for a preview of the foggy-one-minute-sunny-the-next local weather, visit the museum’s continuously updated 24-hour time-lapse feed). The intimate planetarium, hands-on exhibits and friendly staff are wonderful for kids, and the outdoor sculpture garden, perfect for picnics, has telescopes facing the bay. A few minutes farther up the road is Tilden Regional Park; its 2,000-plus acres are crisscrossed with hiking trails and include a botanical garden and showcase farm.



Opened in May by two Brooklyn transplants, Christopher Clarke and Lauren Brody-Clarke, La Botella Republic is a rustic, intimate 33-seat wine bar and bottle shop with a focus on Northern California wines and beers. The well-curated list is best sampled in flights, which change frequently; a recent board spotlighted small producers of rich, fruit-forward cabernet sauvignon (Broadside) and syrah (Ledge Vineyards). The Clarkes’ dedication to area purveyors is also reflected in the food menu, which includes salads, pressed sandwiches, and tasting plates of locally made cheeses, charcuterie, and pickles (pop-up dinners are also in the works). The zinc-topped main bar, lined with ornate, antique Mexican tiles, lends character to the stripped-down, high-ceilinged industrial space, and an additional communal table contributes to the convivial feel. A selection of ciders and sparkling meads rounds out the drinks menu.

Berkeley’s downtown arts district has serious street cred. It’s home to the Freight & Salvage Coffeehouse, which has hosted such folk and bluegrass luminaries as Ramblin’ Jack Elliott, David Grisman, Alison Krauss and Dar Williams since its founding in 1968. Fully renovated five years ago, the Freight is a terrific venue to listen to a full range of live traditional music, both well-known (Mary Chapin Carpenter is scheduled to perform on Oct. 15) and not (all are welcome at open-mike night). Across the street, the Tony Award-winning Berkeley Repertory Theater was also founded at the height of the '60s counterculture; it recently premiered works by Lemony Snicket and David Henry Hwang, and continues to put on plays that tour the world.



If you haven’t made a reservation, late night at Chez Panisse Cafe is a good time for walk-ins. After a devastating fire last year, the legendary restaurant reopened with a face-lift, but everything from the remodeled porch and spiffed-up new facade to the cutout copper lamps is still true to the Craftsman spirit of the original. And the service is as pitch-perfect as always — friendly but not overly solicitous, attentive but not fawning — each member of the staff attuned to a clientele that may arrive in formal attire or flip-flops. A recent cafe dinner menu included corn and goat cheese pudding soufflé, skirt steak with borlotti beans, and a nectarine galette that tasted just like summer.


Do your college student thing this morning and hit up Alchemy Collective Cafe for powerful espresso drinks and a caffeinated crowd strongly represented by the punky, inked and pierced. Then, properly woken up, head a mile and a half away to the cheerful, sunlit Mrs. Dalloway’s bookshop for a morning browsing its well-curated stacks. Its co-owners, Ann Leyhe and Marion Abbott, have had long careers in book publishing, and their passion and knowledge come through in thoughtful displays and recommendations of everything from children’s books to new fiction. Finish up the visit with breakfast sandwiches and elegant pastries next door at the Elmwood Cafe.



WASHINGTON — Federal Reserve officials are looking for a new way to convince markets that they are not yet ready to start raising interest rates, according to an account of the most recent meeting of the Fed’s policy-making committee, released Wednesday.

The Fed plans to end its latest bond-buying campaign at the end of October, as the economy continues to improve. That means it must replace its guidance that it will keep rates near zero for a considerable time after the end of the campaign.

Most Fed officials at the mid-September meeting said they wanted to eliminate any formal reference to a timeline, and instead to describe the decision as dependent on the Fed’s progress in reducing unemployment and raising the sluggish pace of inflation, according to the account, released after a standard three-week delay.


In contemplating this shift, the Fed is seeking to preserve the general perception that a first increase is most likely around the middle of next year, while making clear that the timetable could change if the economy accelerates, or if growth slows.


Narayana Kocherlakota, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, is one of the Fed officials warning against a premature rate increase. Credit Brian Snyder/Reuters
Investors appeared to welcome the signal. In the half-hour after the minutes’ release on Wednesday afternoon, the Dow Jones industrial average tacked on 100 points.

The minutes showed that the central bank was continuing to play for time as it sought greater clarity about the health of the economy. Job growth has been relatively strong this year, and the unemployment rate is fast falling toward what the Fed regards as a normal level. But inflation has been relatively weak, a problem in its own right, and there is strong evidence the labor market may be weaker than it seems.

Economic data since the meeting has accentuated both trends. The economy added 248,000 jobs in September, while inflation was again weaker than expected. The growth of other large economies is also lagging behind the United States, and some of those countries are pushing to devalue their currencies.

Fed officials at the meeting expressed concerns that these trends could weaken domestic growth and further suppress inflation. The Fed’s staff reported that it did not expect inflation to reach the Fed’s preferred 2 percent annual pace over the next several years.

Two Fed officials who are among the strongest advocates for the stimulus campaign warned this week against a premature rate increase. Narayana Kocherlakota, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, said Tuesday that if the economy maintained its current trajectory, it would be inappropriate to raise rates at any point during 2015.

Charles Evans, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, said Wednesday that he was very uncomfortable with calls for earlier rate increases.

I believe that the biggest risk we face today is prematurely engineering restrictive monetary conditions, Mr. Evans said.

The stronger tone of recent remarks by the Fed’s activist wing is driven in part by the continued weakness of inflation. It also reflects a concern that the internal debate may be moving away from their views.


An important question concerns the extent of slack in the labor market. The Fed described the remaining slack as considerable in its September statement, and the minutes made clear that most officials hold this view.

Participants noted variously that the level of nonfarm payroll jobs had only recently returned to its pre-recession level, that the number of individuals working part time for economic reasons was still elevated relative to the level of unemployment, and that the labor force participation rate was still below assessments of its structural trend, it said.

The Fed spent months developing a broader measure of labor market conditions, incorporating 19 data sources, and it said earlier this week that it would now publish the results monthly. But this Labor Market Conditions Index closely tracks the unemployment rate — that is, it tends to validate rather than undermine the idea that relatively little slack remains in the labor market.

The most powerful evidence against this view remains the slow pace of inflation. And this measure may offer increasing clarity in the coming months because historically, wages and prices start to rise as unemployment falls below 6 percent.

Notably, Fed officials appear willing to wait and watch that experiment unfold. Two influential centrists said in the last week that they still considered it likely that the Fed would not raise rates before the middle of next year.

William C. Dudley, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, said Tuesday that he saw relatively little chance that economic growth would accelerate. He cited weak consumer spending and tight credit conditions. But he said the economy was now growing well enough that it was reasonable to expect the Fed would begin to raise its benchmark interest rate around the middle of next year.

I hope the economy cooperates, Mr. Dudley said. If it does and liftoff begins sometime next year, that will be something to be very excited about. It will signal that the economy is finally getting healthier.

He added, That would be very good news even if it were to cause a bump or two in financial markets.

WASHINGTON — AT&T’s wireless business will pay $105 million in penalties and refunds to consumers for unlawfully billing its customers’ cellphone accounts, federal and state regulators announced Wednesday.

AT&T Mobility, one of the country’s largest mobile phone companies, agreed to pay $80 million to the Federal Trade Commission to provide refunds to customers who were billed hundreds of millions of dollars" in unauthorized charges for items including ringtones and text messages with love tips and horoscopes, the commission said.

In addition, AT&T will pay $20 million in penalties and fees to 50 states and the District of Columbia and a $5 million penalty to the Federal Communications Commission for the practices, known as mobile cramming. The settlement is the largest of seven such actions the F.T.C. has taken since April 2013.



John J. Legere, T-mobile’s chief, last month. The F.T.C. has accused the company of charging fees for texting services like flirting tips and celebrity gossip that customers never ordered.U.S. Accuses T-Mobile of Overbilling
This case underscores the important fact that basic consumer protections — including that consumers should not be billed for charges they did not authorize — are fully applicable in the mobile environment, Edith Ramirez, the F.T.C. chairwoman, said in a statement.

AT&T said that it discontinued billing for those types of third-party charges in December 2013.

While we had rigorous protections in place to guard consumers against unauthorized billing from these companies, last year we discontinued third-party billing for Premium Short Messaging Services, the company said in a statement. Today, we reached a broad settlement to resolve claims that some of our wireless customers were billed for charges from third parties that the customers did not authorize. This settlement gives our customers who believe they were wrongfully billed for P.S.M.S. services the ability to get a refund.

The payments stem from charges, typically $9.99 per month, that were billed by other companies to the accounts of AT&T customers over several years, regulators said. AT&T kept at least 35 percent of the charges, the F.T.C. said, even as many as 40 percent of the billed customers complained about the practices.

In 2011 alone, the commission said, AT&T received more than 1.3 million calls to its customer service lines about the charges. In October of that year, AT&T altered its refund policy to lower the amount of charges that could be returned to customers to two months' worth from three months, a policy shift that the company characterized as intended to help lower refunds, the F.T.C. charged.

The settlement is by far the largest yet that regulators have brought against mobile phone companies for cramming. Over the last year and a half, the F.T.C. has filed five cases against content providers — the companies that originated the charges. The largest of those involved the surrender of about $10 million in assets by the companies involved.

In July, the F.T.C. filed a similar case against T-Mobile, which is contesting the charges.

AT&T will be required to notify customers who were billed for the unauthorized charges about the settlement and the refund program. Consumers who believe they were wrongly charged can submit a refund claim at www.ftc.gov/att or contact the settlement administrator at 1-877-819-9692.


CAIRO — With President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi back from his first visit to the United Nations, the Egyptian news media is hailing his performance there as a transformational moment, for the Egyptian president and even for the General Assembly.

No longer tainted as a former general who ousted Egypt’s first democratically elected president, Mr. Sisi was finally recognized by the international community as a respected statesman and regional leader, Egyptian commentators say. Mr. Sisi even changed the way presidents make speeches at the United Nations, the talk show host Amr Adeeb proclaimed, showing a video clip of Mr. Sisi ending his speech late last month by chanting his nationalist campaign slogan.

Long Live Egypt! Mr. Sisi said to what Egyptian viewers saw as raucous applause from the assembled world leaders.



Egypt’s President Addresses the U.N.
A thing of genius, Mr. Adeeb declared, suggesting the assembly had consecrated a marriage. Abdel Fattah el-Sisi was the groom of the United Nations, and Egypt was the bride.

More than any change in his standing abroad, however, what the event demonstrated was the strength of the cult of personality that Mr. Sisi’s allies are building around him at home as he consolidates his power — a persona far more exalted and protected than even that of Hosni Mubarak, his long-serving predecessor. What viewers back in Egypt could not see was that during the General Assembly, almost all of the diplomats present watched in amused silence as Mr. Sisi’s small entourage did the clapping in response to his chant. But the Egyptian media’s applause was sustained and unanimous, dramatizing a monopolization of power under Mr. Sisi that many analysts say has not occurred in this country since the rule of Mohamed Ali Pasha, the early 19th-century founder of the modern Egyptian state. In the first hundred days since he formally assumed the title of president, Mr. Sisi has already tread where previous leaders hardly dared: He effectively sided with Israel against the Palestinian Islamist group Hamas; he stonewalled high-level Western pressure to release veteran international journalists sentenced to prison on politicized charges; and he rolled back fuel subsidies that were long considered all but untouchable.

And perhaps more surprising, he did it all without facing significant public dissent or protests.

No one in recent Egyptian history has been so firmly in control, said Khaled Fahmy, a history professor at the American University in Cairo. What we are witnessing now breaks all previous precedents, and I don’t think we have seen the end of it.

At home and abroad, Mr. Sisi has capitalized on fears of the chaos that has engulfed surrounding countries. If not for his takeover last year, he said in a recent interview with Time magazine, Egypt would be caught in a vicious cycle of extremism and the U.S. would have felt the need to destroy Egypt.

A catchphrase has become popular here: At least we are not Syria or Iraq. It is earnestly encouraged by pro-government television commentators and half-jokingly repeated by average Egyptians to shrug off bad news.

Presenting himself as the bulwark against disorder, Mr. Sisi has surpassed even President Gamal Abdel Nasser in his ability to command the loyalty of the many fractious and quasi-independent institutions of the modern Egyptian state, Professor Fahmy said, including the military, the internal security forces, the intelligence agencies, the judiciary and the rest of the bureaucracy.

Nasser, whose military coup in 1952 set the template for Arab autocracy, never fully controlled his own army, historians say. But the old institutions and elite all hold Mr. Sisi as their savior. He forestalled the potential challenge to the established order posed by the street protests that ousted Mr. Mubarak in 2011 and then by the electoral victory of Islamists from the Muslim Brotherhood. Mr. Sisi shuttered the main Islamist media at the time of the takeover, and the rest of the private media — dominated by a small business elite — sing his praises, too.

Western diplomats who have met with him describe Mr. Sisi as cheerfully confident but quietly stubborn. He smiles, nods and sounds encouraging. But at the same time he adamantly refuses to bend to Western requests or pressure.

He decimated his main Islamist opposition through mass shootings and arrests, exceeding even Mr. Nasser, whose crackdown against the group took place when it was young and immature, not the elected majority party.

But Mr. Sisi’s success at starting the rollback of fuel subsidies without a public backlash may be the most striking evidence of his standing. Egyptian rulers have acknowledged for decades that the subsidies were increasingly unsustainable, but always avoided the cuts for fear of unrest.

That is the one that surprises me, said Tamara Cofman Wittes, a researcher at the Brookings Institution and a former United States deputy assistant secretary of state for the Middle East, noting that the desperate economic conditions of most Egyptians have only grown worse since the ouster of Mr. Mubarak.

Mr. Sisi has also shown no hurry to elect a new Parliament, even though the transitional road map he initially unveiled on July 3, 2013, called for the selection of a legislature even before the choice of a president.

Instead, Mr. Sisi first operated as the pre-eminent decision maker behind the scenes of the interim government. Then he rearranged the road map to begin with a presidential election. And since winning the presidency in June, with about 98 percent of the vote, he has ruled as both executive and legislature.

The small, non-Islamist parties that initially backed his takeover say Mr. Sisi has turned a deaf ear to their complaints about the long wait for elections. He has not addressed complaints about the new government’s tight restrictions on freedom of assembly, or complaints about the plans for a voting system that experts say will virtually guarantee a rubber-stamp Parliament of local power brokers loyal to Mr. Sisi.

This is a government that does not want to listen to political parties, said Khaled Dawoud, a spokesman for the Constitution Party. We can clearly see that there is a step back in Egypt for political freedom, a narrowing of the space for political debate.

As an initial backer of Mr. Sisi’s takeover, I feel sad and bitter, Mr. Dawoud said. We see a totally opposite direction than what we hoped for. He added: We did not want a military general.

The nationalist frenzy of adulation for Mr. Sisi has ebbed. Cairo shop windows no longer display Sisi cupcakes or Sisi lingerie, and state newspapers no longer publish tributes to his flawless appearance and herculean strength as they did a year ago. The most credible public poll of Egyptian opinion, conducted in May by the Pew Research Center, found that 54 percent of the public viewed Mr. Sisi positively and 45 percent negatively — an approval rating roughly similar to that of his predecessor, Mohamed Morsi, in a poll by Pew about a year earlier.

People saw that there was no miracle, said Samer S. Shehata, an Egyptian-American political scientist who teaches at the University of Oklahoma.

Still, the only real inconvenience during Mr. Sisi’s consolidation of power had appeared to be Western censure — specifically, Washington’s decision to suspend some of its $1.3 billion in annual military aid to Egypt over his crackdown on the Islamist opposition. President Obama said he sought to press Mr. Sisi toward more inclusive and democratic policies. And although the suspension did not appear to influence him, Mr. Sisi has made clear that it annoyed him.

Asked by the television interviewer Charlie Rose about support for Mr. Obama’s military campaign in Iraq and Syria, for example, Mr. Sisi responded testily with a demand of his own: Well, give us the Apaches and F-16s that you have been suspending for over a year and a half now.

But here, too, Mr. Sisi is getting what he wants. American officials have already said that they are restoring the military aid. The Obama administration has actively sought Mr. Sisi’s support for the military campaign against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL. And, to the delight of the Egyptian media, Mr. Obama met with Mr. Sisi in New York, a public recognition from the American leader that Mr. Morsi never achieved.

It is symbolic and important, said Gamal Abdel Gawad of the state-run Al Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies. No longer seen as a military leader who led a coup and became a president, Mr. Gawad said, Mr. Sisi presented himself a responsible statesman who has an understanding and a vision for his country and the region.

Or as a front-page headline in Egypt’s flagship newspaper, Al Ahram, declared after the United Nations session: Long Live Egypt Rocks the Assembly!


HONG KONG — Elaborately tattooed, adorned in rock-star jewelry and flaunting a shock of flamingo-pink hair, Chan Ming-fai usually sells plastic models of movie superheroes at his shop in Mong Kok, a teeming, neon-soaked part of Hong Kong. Now he volunteers as a helper at the protest camp here.

He is not, he boasts, the stock profile of the pro-democracy demonstrators who have rattled this global financial capital for nearly two weeks. While the students leading the protest across the harbor cite theories of civil disobedience and quote Gandhi, Mr. Chan is apt to describe his anger with Beijing in terms of the latest Transformers movie, in which a benevolent China defends Hong Kong from evil metallic aliens.

The movie bowed to Beijing, he said with disgust. I love Transformers, but the last one I couldn’t stand.


Pro-democracy demonstrators sleep near a barricade on a main road in the Mong Kok shopping district in Hong Kong on Wednesday. Credit Philippe Lopez/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
Thrumming with boisterous indignation, Mong Kok reflects the movement’s appeal beyond the university-educated middle class and displays a diversity and combativeness that could be harder for the authorities to bring to heel, making it a key test of the movement’s staying power.

It started out as a student-led movement, Mr. Chan said. But it’s now a people’s movement. We are not represented by anyone.

While the Mong Kok sit-in has its share of undergraduate earnestness — someone has plastered posters quoting the political philosopher Hannah Arendt — it has also kindled a populist raucousness that will not be easily curbed, even if student leaders, now negotiating with the government, urge the protesters to withdraw.

It’s impossible to give up Mong Kok, said Kevin Kwong, a 25-year-old Ph.D. student in philosophy at the Chinese University of Hong Kong. He had just woken up from a night sleeping on Nathan Road, a street usually thronged with shoppers. The protest encampment at the government center, in Hong Kong’s Admiralty section, is under the control of protest groups, he said. In Mong Kok there are no leaders, and no groups.

Irwin Mong, a hyperkinetic 38-year-old bass guitarist with the band Wonder Garl, known by his stage name, 762, said many of the Mong Kok protesters were jaded about politics but had been jolted onto the streets by the sight of the police firing tear gas and pepper spray at demonstrators who surrounded the city government offices on Sep. 28.

Since then, a stretch of Nathan Road in Mong Kok has been filled with residents who felt voiceless under Hong Kong’s leadership system. The city’s leader is appointed by the Chinese government, after a ballot of a committee of 1,200 members, dominated by members of the wealthy elite and political operatives beholden to Beijing.


We hate politics, Mr. Mong said. It’s not something you love, but it’s something you need to do. It’s like removing your cat’s poo.

The crowd has included students, gathered under tents and tarpaulins, and many others, often sporting defiantly flamboyant fashion. A regular visitor has been a volunteer defender who wears a full-face mask and wields a Captain America shield.

Andy Yung, a photogenic 30-year-old lifeguard, has also provided security for the student protesters, dressed like a speed skater in padded knee and elbow guards and a helmet.

I’m protecting the students, because they’re the ones who have the power over the government, he said, between posing cheerfully for photographs with admirers. If we don’t protect them, then society has no conscience.

Unlike most protesters, Mr. Mong, a.k.a. 762, said he did not focus his ire on 689, the dismissive nickname for Hong Kong’s leader, Leung Chun-ying, who won the job in 2012 with that many votes in the 1,200-member election committee.

He’s just a puppet, Mr. Mong said. I hate the system more.

Mong Kok, a warren of shops, restaurants, hotels and markets on the Kowloon side of the city, is often jammed with mainland Chinese visitors, who come to buy Swiss watches, jewelry and pharmaceutical products that are cheaper and less likely to be fake than those on the mainland, and baby formula less likely to be tainted with poison. For more than a few protesters, resentment of Chinese policies toward Hong Kong merged with antipathy toward the Chinese tourists, a sentiment that sometimes festered into bigotry.

One of the world’s densest neighborhoods, on the north side of Victoria Harbor, Mong Kok is traditionally more culturally Cantonese and more working class than the skyscraper-encrusted Hong Kong Island on the south side. Sex is also for sale nearby, and even many Hong Kong people, used to intense crowds, find Mong Kok a trial.

Regina Ip, a pro-Beijing politician, speaking of the protests there, described it as a very sleazy part of Hong Kong.

Protesters complained that big companies eager to attract mainland Chinese tourists and their demand for expensive bling had forced up rents, driving out shops for local residents. The two-block stretch of Nathan Road where the protesters have gathered has 48 jewelry and watch stores facing the street, not counting the many stores tucked away in arcades and on upper floors.

Hong Kong people come here less and less, because they think it’s for Chinese tourists, said Stephen Sho, 25, a protester who recently graduated from the engineering program at Hong Kong Polytechnic University. All the ordinary shops and small stuff has disappeared.

While the Admiralty site has been filled almost exclusively with protesters, in Mong Kok the demonstrators have encountered opposition from neighborhood residents.

On Friday, dozens of middle-aged men, including some whom the police said belonged to criminal gangs known as triads, tore through the camp, punching and kicking protesters and tearing apart their tents and shelters. The mob pushed the remaining protesters back to a tent, until the police sent reinforcements and began hauling the attackers away.


After that, the protesters returned and strengthened their own security with defenders like Captain America and Handsome Lifeguard.

The Mong Kok sit-in has also been the site of rare face-to-face debate between supporters and opponents. In the main tent, anyone can step up and give a two-minute speech broadcast over a loudspeaker. The area has resounded with noisy impromptu arguments, peppered with the earthy language that is a local specialty, usually between young protesters and their opponents, mostly older men.

Wong Man-dun, 73, a retired hotel manager, took time out from heckling protesters to tell a reporter that he found the students spoiled and arrogant. In America, I know, the government would get rid of them very quickly, he said. So why wait here? Get rid of them.

Some female protesters said they have been sexually harassed and groped by protest opponents. Lots of guys say nasty things to me, said Kaitlyn Chan, a 17-year-old teahouse waitress with two cats tattooed on her shoulder who has been at the Mong Kok protests from the start. I’m not happy, but I don’t respond. I have to show tolerance.

When quarrels threaten to escalate into fights, volunteer stewards now rush in to calm tempers, while the police keep watch. Protesters have also learned to drown out bellicose opponents by singing Happy Birthday in English.

Most protesters at Mong Kok said they belonged to no organized protest group and boasted that they would be unlikely to leave, even if student leaders strike a deal with the government.

Mr. Chan said he decided to join the protests after police arrested the 17-year-old student leader Joshua Wong. But now even if Mr. Wong called for protesters to leave the streets, Mr. Chan said he would stay put.

I will not retreat until the government budges, he said.


AMMAN, Jordan — Jordan is refusing to let Syrian refugees cross the border, international refugee agencies said on Wednesday, expressing fear that thousands have been left stranded with limited access to food and other supplies.

We have not recorded any Syrian refugees crossing into Jordan in the past week, said Andrew Harper, the top official with the United Nations refugee agency in Jordan.

The International Organization for Migration concurred, saying that no Syrians had been transported from the border area to refugee camps in Jordan since Oct. 1, when 44 Syrians crossed over.

However, the Jordanian government denied that the border had been closed to anyone other than those deemed a security risk. There is no change on our open-border policy, said a government spokesman, Mohammad Momani. Those who are injured, women and children continue to cross, but the numbers of those entering are subject to the security assessment in the field.

Jordan is one of the Middle Eastern countries that have joined the United States-led military campaign against the Islamic State terrorist group in Iraq and Syria. Last month, it sent warplanes to strike the militants in Syria, prompting fears of terrorist reprisals. Analysts said the threat from the Islamic State and allied groups might have prompted stricter border controls.


ISIS and Kurds Battle Over Syrian Border Town


An explosion rose from the Syrian Kurdish town of Kobani on Wednesday, as fighters from the Islamic State militant group appeared to hold their ground there despite intensive American-led airstrikes.ISIS Advances in Syrian Border Town of Kobani Despite AirstrikesOCT. 8, 2014
Kurds in Suruc, Turkey, on Tuesday watching the fighting across the border in Kobani, Syria. There have been 18 airstrikes there.Turkish Inaction on ISIS Advance Dismays the U.S.OCT. 7, 2014
graphic How ISIS WorksSEPT. 16, 2014
video ISIS’ Goals and Tactics WorldwideSEPT. 10, 2014
Tightening the border is a logical reaction from the government’s perspective, said Manar Rachwani, a columnist and op-ed editor at Al Ghad, an independent daily newspaper, especially because the Nusra Front, Al Qaeda’s wing in Syria, is on its border, and they are being targeted by the U.S./Arab-led coalition against ISIS.

It’s a new reality, but we don’t know what the end game for the region will be, so there is a lot of instability and fear, he said.

Jamil Nimri, a member of Parliament, agreed. Jordan has entered a war with ISIS and there is indeed severe security concerns, he said. I believe there is a connection between the bombing campaign against ISIS and the fact that no refugees have been allowed into Jordan.

More than three million Syrians, half of them children, have fled the country’s civil war to neighboring countries, including Lebanon, Turkey and Jordan. Until mid-2013, the flow of refugees from Syria to Jordan exceeded 2,000 per day. This rate then dropped to several hundred until last week’s sudden halt, refugee agencies said.

As of early October, 1.15 million Syrians had registered with the United Nations refugee agency in Lebanon, it said, and Turkey had absorbed 1.03 million as of late September.

Jordan, with a population of 6.5 million, has drawn waves of refugees in the past, but the crisis in Syria is particularly severe and is straining the country’s limited resources. The Syrian civil war, now in its fourth year, has triggered an influx of over 600,000 refugees in Jordan.

Jordan’s official news agency, Petra, reported last month that the authorities had arrested several supporters of the Islamic State who were accused of recruiting for the group and using the Internet to promote extremist views.


Lawmakers recently approved several amendments to Jordan’s antiterrorism laws, including one that criminalizes any attempt to join terrorist organizations or recruit on their behalf.

According to a report released in mid-September by the United Nations refugee agency, 64 percent of refugees arriving in Jordan, most from northern Syria, cited fear of the Islamic State as the primary reason they fled.

In the sprawling border refugee camp in Zaatari, which shelters around 80,000 Syrians, one refugee, Mohamad al-Ghazawi, said aid workers and Syrians in the camp who spoke to relatives this week said refugees were not being allowed to enter. We heard the severely injured are barely being allowed to cross inside, he said.

Jordan is still accepting Iraqi refugees who obtain visas. The United Nations refugee agency reported that more than 10,000 Iraqis were registered this year in Jordan. The highest monthly tally of new registrations since 2007 came in August, during the peak of sectarian violence in Iraq.

Although Jordan is not a signatory to the 1951 Refugee Convention, the United Nations refugee agency and the government signed an agreement in 1998 specifying that asylum seekers may stay in Jordan pending a determination of their refugee status.

MADRID — A dog named Excalibur who belonged to an Ebola-infected nurse was put down on Wednesday, even as protesters and animal rights activists surrounded the Madrid home of the nurse and her husband. A online petition calling for the dog’s life to be spared had drawn hundreds of thousands of signatures.

The furor came amid questions about whether dogs can get and transmit the disease.

In the United States, a spokesman for the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Thomas Skinner, said Wednesday that studies had shown that dogs can have an immune response to Ebola, meaning that they can become infected. But he said there have been no reports of dogs or cats developing Ebola symptoms or passing the disease to other animals or to people.

The death of Excalibur, a 12-year old rescue dog, was confirmed to reporters by Javier Rodríguez, an official from Madrid’s regional government, and the corpse was expected to be cremated.


Spanish Prime Minister Defends Handling of Ebola CaseOCT. 8, 2014
The nurse’s husband had pleaded publicly with officials in Madrid to change their minds about putting down the dog. He told the Spanish newspaper El Mundo that there was no indication that Excalibur was infected with Ebola. The nurse has been identified as María Teresa Romero Ramos.

Mr. Skinner said the disease centers were recommending that Ebola patients with dogs or cats at home evaluate the animal’s risk of exposure, meaning they should assess how likely it is that the animal has ingested bodily fluids like blood, vomit and feces from the patient. If the animal has been exposed, it should be monitored for 21 days, the incubation period for the disease.

THE HAGUE — After four years of hearings and hundreds of witnesses, the war crimes trial of Radovan Karadzic, the former Bosnian Serb leader, ended on Tuesday, with Mr. Karadzic proclaiming his innocence and the prosecution demanding that he be convicted and given the harshest sentence: life imprisonment.

In his closing statement, Mr. Karadzic said that if the court, known as the United Nations International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, had any claim to be impartial, he should be acquitted on all 11 counts of war crimes and genocide that he faces. He again accused the prosecution of distorting the truth, saying he was a man of peace who did everything possible to avoid war.

Mr. Karadzic, 69, insisted on acting as his own lawyer, but he also worked with a legal team that included Peter Robinson, an American lawyer. Last week, Mr. Robinson spoke in Mr. Karadzic’s defense on the gravest charges — two counts of genocide — saying that he had neither knowledge of nor intent to commit the mass murders of Bosnia’s Croats and Muslims during the 1992-95 war.

Radovan Karadzic Credit Michael Kooren/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
The trial ended on a heated note, with sharp exchanges. Mr. Robinson told the three judges hearing the case that if they agreed to the prosecution’s legal lynching, they would be convicting an innocent man.

Mr. Karadzic — the ex-fugitive whose astonishing career has included stints as a psychiatrist, a poet, a politician, a bearded New Age healer and now a lawyerly professor — remained an enigmatic and chameleonlike figure during his trial, earnestly presenting an alternative narrative that stunned specialists following the case. Although he had delivered fiery speeches leading up to the war, he said he was a true friend to Muslims and had tried to make them feel safe.

During Mr. Karadzic’s often-rambling presentations, he remained polite to the judges and even to prosecutors.

Mr. Karadzic’s broad line of defense was that the Bosnian war erupted because the Serbs, predominantly Eastern Orthodox Christians, needed to defend themselves against a new Bosnian Muslim separatist regime determined to create an Islamic state.

The prosecution, led by another American lawyer, Alan Tieger, has said that Mr. Karadzic was himself commander of a separatist Serb government that set out to remove non-Serbs from all areas of Bosnia that had been traditionally Serb.

In the resulting 1992 campaign, which came to be known as ethnic cleansing, hundreds of thousands of Muslims and ethnic Croats, largely Roman Catholic, were driven from their villages, their homes looted and their mosques and churches demolished. In many cases, men and boys were rounded up and held in concentration camps, where thousands were tortured and executed or died of starvation, prosecutors said. Women were raped or used as sex slaves. These crimes, prosecutors say, constitute genocide.

The prosecution has also accused Mr. Karadzic of organizing the three-year siege of the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo. An estimated 12,000 Sarajevans were killed.

But the single crime that has provoked the greatest international outrage involves the execution of more than 7,000 men and boys in July 1995 in and around the eastern town of Srebrenica, which had been declared a United Nations safe area two years earlier. When the United Nations declined to order airstrikes to support the small contingent of United Nations peacekeepers there, the Bosnian Serb Army, assisted by Serbian forces, overran the area.

Mr. Robinson said that even though the Srebrenica massacre was one of the world’s best-documented crimes, there was no evidence that Mr. Karadzic had planned or ordered the executions.

Mr. Tieger responded that Mr. Karadzic had lied and mischaracterized events, presented unsupported statements and invented a new reality. In his final statement, Mr. Karadzic struck a different tone. If the Serbs, Croats and Muslims had wanted to live in a secular state, without building religion into it, we could have lived together, each in their own canton.

He went on: I apologize to everyone for my amateurism, but my thirst for the truth is much stronger than my legal knowledge.

A verdict is expected next year.

NEW DELHI — A high court judge refused on Tuesday to grant bail to Jayalalithaa Jayaram, the longtime chief minister of the state of Tamil Nadu, noting in his ruling that India’s Supreme Court was taking a tougher view of corruption, interpreting it as “a violation of human rights.”

Ms. Jayaram, an enormously popular leader, was sentenced last month to four years in prison on charges that she illegally enriched herself in the first of her three terms as chief minister. Her lawyers had argued for her sentence to be suspended pending her appeal.

Ms. Jayaram’s conviction shook her political organization and cast her followers, who call her Amma, or Mother, into despair, with some going on hunger strikes or shaving their heads in a sign of mourning. The police also attributed a number of suicides, including by poisoning and self-immolation, to distress over the verdict.

Though the trial was moved to the neighboring state of Karnataka, a crowd of supporters from Tamil Nadu has been camping since late September outside the prison where Ms. Jayaram is being held. The crowd erupted in celebration on Tuesday, setting off firecrackers and distributing sweets, when the prosecutor in the case told the Karnataka High Court that he had no objection to granting her bail.

The jubilation was doused abruptly when the judge refused to do so.

“The honorable Supreme Court has held that corruption violates human rights,” the judge, A. V. Chandrashekara, wrote in his ruling. “It is further held that systematic corruption is violation of human rights as it leads to economic crisis.”

The decision went on to say that the court had been “adding new dimension to the approach to be adopted towards the public servants involved in cases of corruption.”

O. Panneerselvam, a lieutenant of Ms. Jayaram’s who stepped in as chief minister, appealed to party members to refrain from public disturbances. “Do not indulge in closure and strike — Jayalalithaa doesn’t like these,” he said in a statement, according to NDTV, a news channel. “Keeping calm is the only way to express love for Jayalalithaa.”